Did you notice that in each of the titles
of our symposium talks,
it uses the word “despite”?
The English word “despite” can mean
without being blocked or thwarted.
So our ability to rejoice
will not be blocked or thwarted.
We can actually rejoice despite trials.
Well, initially,
that sounds contradictory, doesn’t it?
I usually associate with rejoicing
the receiving of gifts, not trials.
And yet, that is the very point.
We can rejoice
despite trials because of gifts
that Jehovah provides for us.
And we’re going to review
three of those in our symposium:
our relationship with Jehovah,
our precious brotherhood,
and the glorious hope we have for the future.
Please turn with me to Romans chapter 5,
verses 3-5,
and see if you can identify
when this first gift
is introduced in the verses
—a relationship with Jehovah.
Romans 5:3-5 says: “Not only that,
“but let us rejoice while in tribulations,
“since we know
that tribulation produces endurance;
endurance, in turn, an approved condition.”
Well, “an approved condition” with whom?
It’s with Jehovah.
It says: “The approved condition,
in turn, hope,
and the hope
does not lead to disappointment.”
And why not?
Because of this relationship with Jehovah.
It says: “Because the love of God
“has been poured out into our hearts
through the holy spirit,
which was given to us.”
Yes, when we endure trials,
we can sense Jehovah’s approval,
and that helps us
to rejoice despite the hardship.
Now find Romans 8:38, 39.
As you know, Paul experienced
one trial after the other,
and yet he was convinced that no trial
could distance him from Jehovah
(could separate him from God’s love),
an abiding relationship.
Romans 8:38, 39 says: “For I am convinced
“that neither death nor life
nor angels nor governments
“nor things now here nor things to come
“nor powers nor height nor depth
“[and then he says] nor any other creation
“will be able to separate us from God’s love
that is in Christ Jesus our Lord.”
Our relationship with God
can help us in times of trial.
But how about the second gift from Jehovah?
First Peter 5:9
—1 Peter 5:9—
Satan tries to capitalize on our trials,
but notice the admonition here in verse 9.
It says: “But take your stand
against him, firm in the faith.”
And what will help?
It says: “Knowing that the same
kind of sufferings [so trials]
“are being experienced
by the entire association
of your brothers in the world.”
Well, we have felt that trust,
the support from our brotherhood,
particularly in these last six months or so.
We’ve sensed it so clearly.
Romans 12:12 is our third gift from Jehovah
—a provision to help us to endure trials.
Romans 12:12 and it says it
so very crystal clear.
It says: “Rejoice in the hope.”
And then it adds: “Endure under tribulation.
Persevere in prayer.”
So our relationship with Jehovah,
the brotherhood,
and our hope can help us
deal with these circumstances,
and it might vary
depending on circumstance.
Just as an example,
a brother in prison might have
no access at all to the brotherhood.
So, what sustains him?
Well, in that case, it would be
his relationship with Jehovah.
You may be remembering Brother Harold King
on JW Broadcasting®.
For four and a half years,
he was in solitary confinement
in a Chinese prison.
But was he really all alone?
The authorities thought so,
but he had the best cell mate
anyone would ever want.
He said in his video interview:
“I had a lovely relationship with Jehovah.
“I loved him very dearly.
He was real.
He wasn’t fictitious.”
Yes, Brother King was able
to rejoice under that trial
because he had developed
that real relationship with his God.
Another example:
A depressed brother or a sister
may be struggling to maintain
his relationship with God.
Well, there’s another gift
from Jehovah that can come into play.
He may be supported by one
or more of the brotherhood.
It’s like a person
who’s fighting to breathe properly.
He’s still alive,
but he’s struggling to hold on.
But then in comes
the support of a medical team,
and he begins functioning normally again
and breathing properly.
Our brotherhood can come
to our aid and support
when we’re suffering depression
or some other serious trial.
Well, how can our hope
help us to rejoice despite the trial?
Another example:
Some of us have Christian parents
who are now old and incapacitated
in some way, and that’s a trial for us.
It might be like a loved one
having a bad accident,
and now he’s laid up in a hospital bed.
He can’t take care of himself.
But then the doctor comes in and says,
“He’s going to have a full recovery.”
Well, that gives us hope.
It’s similar with our elderly parents
because of our sure hope for the future.
It’s like Jehovah saying,
‘They’re going to have a full recovery
from the ravages of old age.’
Yes, hope helps us to rejoice.
Whatever our situation or trial, we can
be sure that one or more of these provisions
will help us
suffer through the hardship with joy.
I invite you to find now Romans chapter 8,
Romans chapter 8, and we’re going
to look at verses 35 and 37.
In this symposium,
we’re going to be considering
each of the seven trials
mentioned in verse 35.
Please identify them with me.
Romans 8:35 says:
“Who will separate us
from the love of the Christ?
“Will [1] tribulation or [2] distress
“or [3] persecution
or [4] hunger or [5] nakedness
or [6] danger or [7] sword?”
Those are the seven,
but now look at verse 37.
It says: “On the contrary,
in all these things [all seven of them]
we are coming off completely victorious
through the one who loved us.”
Well, each symposium talk
will include a video
of a brother or sister
who experienced a trial, a severe one.
And we will identify which of these gifts
helped them to rejoice
despite the tribulation.
Let’s consider that first one
that Paul addressed;
it’s called “tribulation.”
Tribulation refers to suffering
caused by some trying situation,
possibly a debilitating illness.
Turn with me
to 2 Corinthians chapter 12,
2 Corinthians chapter 12, and we’re going
to look at verses 7 and 8.
This tribulation was vexing to Paul,
so much so that he
called it a thorn in his flesh.
Second Corinthians 12:7, 8 says:
“To keep me from becoming overly exalted,
“I was given a thorn in the flesh,
“an angel of Satan, to keep slapping me,
“so that I might not be overly exalted.
“Three times I begged the Lord about this,
that it would depart from me.”
“A thorn in the flesh”
—so this obviously was a physical malady,
and he said it kept “slapping [him],”
so it was continuing on.
It wasn’t just like the common cold or flu,
and we’re better in a week or so.
This was continual.
It was a chronic trial for him to deal with,
and based on the Scriptures,
it’s thought that it may have been
a serious degeneration of his eyesight.
Well, that would have been
very disconcerting to Paul.
In fact, he prayed three times
that it would be gone.
‘Take it away from me.’
And remember, they did not have
eyeglasses with corrective lenses back then
—no eye surgery was available.
So this was a chronic tribulation.
And think about this:
By means of holy spirit,
Paul had on a number of occasions
cured people of their sickness.
So he could have easily wondered:
‘Where is this gift of the holy spirit
when I need it?
I need a cure.’
Well, what helped Paul to rejoice
despite his tribulation?
It was his close,
abiding relationship with Jehovah.
If you still have 2 Corinthians
chapter 12 there,
let’s read together verse 9.
And this is where Jehovah tells Paul,
‘You will have no miraculous cure.’
Verse 9: “But he said to me:
“‘My undeserved kindness
is sufficient for you,
for my power is being made perfect
in weakness.’”
Jehovah says, ‘No cure,
but I’m going to give you the power
to continue on despite the tribulation.’
Well, notice the relationship
that Paul evidently has with Jehovah
in the last part of that verse.
He says: “Most gladly, then,
I will boast about my weaknesses,
in order that the power of the Christ
may remain over me like a tent.”
He rejoiced in the strength from Jehovah.
Look at verse 10;
he said: “So I take pleasure
“[and we can substitute
with the word “rejoice.” I rejoice]
“in weaknesses,
in insults, in times of need,
“in persecutions
and difficulties, for Christ.
For when I am weak,
then I am powerful.”
Well, we want you to watch a video,
and this is an example of tribulation.
What helped this brother and his wife
to rejoice under tribulation
in the form of a serious illness?
For  the last 45 years,
I’ve been in the pioneer work,
traveling work,
and in Bethel here
for a number of years.
My health was very good
—never had any problems at all.
One day, I had a headache.
It was severe.
I really couldn’t see clearly—anything.
We went to the Bethel doctor,
and he referred us to a specialist,
and the specialist
gave us the diagnosis
of a very aggressive brain tumor
called glioblastoma.
He had surgery the next Thursday.
Then, after surgery, he had radiation
and chemotherapy at the same time.
A year later, he had to have another surgery.
And right now he is on his fourth type
of chemotherapy treatment.
From the very first time that he got sick,
the hardest thing
was to see my husband
become increasingly dependent
upon me and upon other people.
I didn’t want this
to define who we are.
The brothers played a pivotal role
and tried to help us.
One brother found out
that I had to go in for surgery.
He gave me a scripture,
and we prayed together.
I’ll always remember that.
It was a beautiful example.
I also get a lot
of encouragement from Sara,
who gets us prepared for meetings.
When we go out in service,
I’ve gotten the opportunity
to go and help people
—just talk to them
and encourage them.
In my Bethel assignment
in the Service Department,
I have a brother or two
who will come over and review a case
that we’re considering,
and I get a lot of joy in that way.
I’m very thankful that I
can still do a little something
to help.
For me,
because he’s been humble
through this whole thing, it’s been easier.
My hope is strong, and I’m going to keep
right on going this way
and serve Jehovah
right on into the new world
or whatever comes.
Obviously, Scott and Sara Shoffner
had a good relationship with Jehovah,
and Sara supported Scott wonderfully.
But did you notice
the additional gift from Jehovah?
Scott said that the brotherhood
played a pivotal role in helping them.
He remembered
a specific scripture and a prayer
that was shared before his surgery,
and young brothers came in and helped him
with his assignment afterward.
In his own words,
he said that that brought him “a lot of joy”
—joy despite tribulation.
So how about you?
Which of the provisions
from Jehovah is buoying you up
as you deal
with your particular trial or tribulation?
your relationship with Jehovah?
Is it the brotherhood, your hope,
or maybe some other gift from God?
If you’re stressed, under tribulation,
remember this: It’s as if Jehovah
is watching the monitor,
and he sees us in pain of heart.
But he reassures us and says: ‘Be calm.
You’re going to be OK.’
So no matter the pain,
no matter the tribulation,
may we remember
those words at Romans
chapter 8, verses 37 and 39:
“In all these things we
are coming off completely victorious
through the one who loved us.”
And in verse 39, it’s saying that nothing,
nothing, no tribulation
“will be able to separate us
from God’s love
that is in Christ Jesus our Lord.”
Rejoice despite tribulation.
And now it’s my pleasure to introduce
Brother Samuel Herd,
a member of the Governing Body,
for the talk on the symposium
“We Can Rejoice Despite . . . Distress.”